## Research

Open access to the research data will, in the long term, allow the maximum exploitation of their scientific potential. The potential users of the Research collection are experimental and theoretical physicists who were not members of the collaboration collecting the data as well as collaboration members who might want to return to the data long after they were recorded. Also, these data can be of use in other domains: interest in CMS open data has been expressed from areas such as machine learning and development of statistical methods.

To facilitate the data use, technical details regarding the information contained in the data, as well as key points to keep in mind when performing an analysis, were collected on the Portal. This includes explanations of so-called physics objects\footnote{\url{http://opendata.cern.ch/about/CMS-Physics-Objects}}, which represent individual particles or groups of particles produced in an individual collision.

Reproducibility is a crucial aspect of the scientific method, and it cannot be achieved without open data. The reproducibility of CMS results using the provided open data has been tested with high-level validation analyses performed on the primary datasets available on the Portal. These validation benchmarks reproduce highly cited analyses that CMS published with a similar data volume\footnote{See the validation record \url{http://opendata.cern.ch/record/460} and the corresponding CMS publication \url{http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-0221/7/10/P10002}}. Although these analyses are not too complicated, they nevertheless have interesting physics contents, and offer the possibility of comparison with data at other beam energies in the future. All steps in these benchmarks are doable with the tools and information available publicly; information that was previously lacking to complete the process is being made available on the Portal.

Novel research is also being conducted using the CMS open data. Theoretical physicists at MIT recently presented new particle-physics analyses that used CMS open data.
